CHAPTER NINE

I’M SYLVAN GLASS. I’ve come to see about getting some clothes made.”

Claudie took it in, this tall girl standing there on her porch with a clutch of magazines in her hands. She felt some kind of something, some shiver run through her, as though she were looking at the figure she’d drawn on all those pieces of paper all her life. The lines. The curves. The carriage. Now here she was, standing in front of her on the porch next to the rotting old sofa her grandmother had died on. She took it all in, and she saw the clay she’d been waiting for all her life, the clay from which she would build her perfect model of the white women who had both mystified and fascinated her.

“Well, you better come in, ma’am.”

Sylvan laughed. “Please don’t call me ma’am. I’m only seventeen. It makes me feel like an old lady. Call me Sylvan. Everybody tells me you can do anything. I’ve been mad to meet you. Simply mad. Here, hold these,” and she thrust the magazines into Claudie’s hands, then ran to the sleek white convertible Boaty had bought her and came back with a dozen bolts of cloth in her arms.

They stepped through the torn screen door and into the dim hallway that led to the workroom. Sylvan took notice of the broken chairs, the dusty box record player tilted on its side, the remnants of other people’s fabrics, the cat smell. She just hoped there weren’t snakes in the house. She’d seen worse, back home. It didn’t bother her at all.

In the workroom there was a big wooden table, and two chairs, and Claudie moved around the room, turning on the lights one by one until the gloom dissolved and Sylvan could see how clean everything was. There was a dress form, an old wooden box filled with every kind of scissor, a sewing box, and an immaculate new Singer sewing machine. There was no sign of life, of living, just the implements of Claudie’s work. Sylvan had heard she had a daughter, but she didn’t see or hear anybody, didn’t sense that anybody did anything in this room except what they were doing now.

“I’ve seen you. You’re married to Mr. Glass.”

“Call me Sylvan.”

“I can’t.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. It’s not my way. I just can’t. People around here . . . What are you after?”

“Dresses. A suit. Some skirts and blouses. I don’t know if you can make them.”

“I can make anything.”

“I heard that. From a picture?”

“From a picture. From a pattern. From some idea in your head, if you can say it clear.”

“I’ve got pictures,” she pointed to the magazines, dog-eared pages flipped over at the corners. “I just went to Hollywood, California, and I saw so many things. I think I even maybe saw Miss Joan Crawford. Looked like her, anyway. And I got these magazines all about movie stars. Miss Lauren Bacall. She’s married to an old man just like me. Miss Lana Turner. Lots of movie stars. There’s pictures of what they wear to lunch at the Brown Derby, what they wear at home when they have other movie stars over for tea parties or cards, everything.”

“Where do you come from? Not from around here.”

“I actually do. Right near here, out in the county.” She made it sound like she came from some grand plantation, with servants and foxhounds. But Claudie could tell.

“And how was that for you?”

“Well, I’m here in town, aren’t I?”

“You talk like somebody on the radio.”

“I hope so. I been studying that thing a long time. You don’t smile a lot.”

“Haven’t seen anything funny so far.”

“Most of the colored women around here smile at me all the time.”

“They’re not me.”

“No. I guess not.”

“I make clothes. I’m real good at it. Ask anybody. Rest of the time, I just mind my own business. I don’t know who that Crawford woman or any of those other women are. I’ve never been to the movies. Why would I?”

“You’ve never seen such beautiful people. Every one of them. That’s why they call them stars, I guess. They just shine.”

Claudie smiled finally, a broad, sweet smile that made her look fourteen. “How old you say you were?”

“I’m seventeen. But I’m married already. See, you smiled.”

“You wouldn’t believe some of the things I hear, the way some women fool themselves. They think they’re thin when they’re fat, or the other way around. They act like they’re rich when they can’t even pay their old cleaning woman. You. You think I can turn you into somebody you’re not, just somebody you saw who looked like somebody else who makes movies. Well, I like a dreamer. I’m a dreamer. I can’t tell you I can do that, turn you into Miss Cranford or whatever her name is, but I sure can make you some pretty clothes to wear. Let’s see what you’re after. Let’s see those magazines.”

So they sat down and went through Photoplay, Motion Picture, Screenland, and the rest, Sylvan turning the pages as if they were the pages of an ancient family Bible, her face lit up with longing and hope. She pointed out daytime dresses that were so fanciful they looked like something out of a fairytale. Suits that made Claudie want to reach for the scissors and start cutting. Elegant, lush clothes, alive with desire, worn on rich, full bodies. Claudie felt her heart beat fast in her chest.

Here was a girl who wanted to wear the kind of clothes Claudie wanted to make, who had the kind of full, womanly body she wanted to make them for. She didn’t ask why, or where on earth in this town Sylvan thought she was going to wear them, she just knew this girl had an idea in mind of who she was going to be, and that excited her.

They went through every magazine. As they looked at the pictures, Sylvan told Claudie about this fantastic place she’d been, Hollywood, staying in a hotel called the Roosevelt, with maids who changed the sheets every single day, taking buses and taxis, eating a lobster, going to a movie studio, and actually seeing some of the houses where these impossibly beautiful people lived, at least glimpsing them in the distance through the thickly ivied front gates.

She’d gone to a department store, dragging her husband along. She’d bought so much material for the clothes she wanted they had to buy an extra steamer trunk, yards and yards of stuff even Claudie had never seen before. Silks, and wools so fine you could have pulled a yard through a wedding ring, and linens as sheer as a handkerchief.

They picked six things, and matched the materials to the dresses they chose. Sylvan undressed down to her slip, and Claudie took all her measurements.

“You have a good behind for clothes,” Claudie said at one point.

Sylvan laughed. “Big,” she said. “At least it’s good for something besides sitting.”

“All us colored women all have big butts,” Claudie said.

“Why is that?”

“Clothes fit better. And the men like it.”

“Do you have a man?”

“Men don’t like me. These men around here, they don’t want a strong woman with her own money and her own car. I might run off on ’em.” She laughed. “Probably would, too, if I had anywhere to go.”

It took all afternoon. By sunset, there were plans for twelve dresses, and Claudie already knew she’d never be paid enough for all the work she was going to put into them. But she didn’t care.

That was the great thing about Claudie. She just didn’t give a damn.





