CHAPTER FIFTEEN

MISSED YOU AT Sunday dinner” was all Will said the next morning. Charlie didn’t say anything, just went on sharpening his knives.

“Alma missed you, too. And Sam asked about you, didn’t you, son?”

“There’s a new comic strip in the funny papers,” Sam said. “Roy Rodgers. I wanted to show you.”

The man and the boy looked at him, but Charlie didn’t answer for a long time.

“Had things to do,” he finally said. “Chores. Nobody looks after me but me.”

“Well, son, we try, you know. Alma and me.” Will sounded a little irritated.

“I know that, Will. And I’m grateful. Sometimes I just need to be alone. Private.”

“It’s not right, you know. There’s something not right about it. Those people—”

“It suits me fine.”

“—you know they don’t want you.”

“Then they’ll let me know.” He hoped they wouldn’t. He went for three weeks straight hoping they wouldn’t tell him to stop coming, especially because the women from the CME came in Monday morning early, as they always did, and a few even said it was nice to see him yesterday at services. But they did, they let him know.

On the third Sunday, right after Charlie had come home from the service and changed out of his church clothes, he was sitting on the porch, just fixing it all in his mind, when Lewis Shadwell walked up the sidewalk, into the part of town where Negroes never went, except to clean white people’s houses, and stepped to the bottom of Charlie’s porch. His face still glowed with the joy of preaching to his congregation.

He was twenty-eight years old, dark skinned, a little heavy but strong, you could tell. He wasn’t yet the firebrand he was later to become, with the sit-ins, and the marches, and getting his picture in the papers. That Sunday, he was just a nice, devout young man who was born shy and gentle and stayed that way until he found a reason to be otherwise. He wore gold-rimmed eyeglasses, and his clerical collar was white and stiff, and tight against his dark, thick neck, as though it had been issued him when he graduated from seminary, before he gained the weight.

“Afternoon, Reverend Shadwell,” said Charlie as he stood up. “Please. Come join me. It’s a little cold to sit outside, so come on in.”

They walked into the sitting room, and Shadwell sat on the sofa, not taking his coat off, as though he shouldn’t really be there, and wouldn’t be staying long. He seemed so uncomfortable, with his coat bunched up around his waist and the dog sniffing his feet, but Charlie didn’t know what to offer him, so he just sat and waited.

Shadwell cleared his throat. Cleared it again. “The thing is . . .” he said, and then he stopped as though he didn’t truly know what the thing was, although both he and Charlie knew well enough. “The thing is, we appreciate it.”

“I should have stayed later, longer,” said Charlie. “I should have said hello to some folks. I apologize.”

“No need. You take what you need and leave the rest, and that’s fine. But the thing is, well, we’ve talked, the elders and I, and we don’t think it’s a good idea. It just can’t be. I’m sorry.”

“You know there’s no place else I’ll go. You know that.”

“I’ve been told. And that’s a shame. Every man should have a spiritual life. It has saved me from such . . . degradation. And it could save you, if you need saving, and I’m not making any judgments and I mean no offense . . .”

“None taken.”

“But we can’t give you what you need. And I want to explain why.”

“There’s no need.”

“But I want to. I want you to know that this is not some unkindness on our part. I need, we need for you to know that. The thing is, we’re grateful. What you’ve done, coming to us, is an act of both bravery and kindness. But you’re not from around here, and there’s things you just don’t, can’t understand.”

Charlie didn’t say anything. He just called the dog over, and sat with Jackie Robinson at his feet, and he waited. His heart was beating like thunder. He couldn’t say why. It was like being called to the principal’s office for some infraction he didn’t remember committing.

“We are watched, Mister Beale. Every time we set foot out the door, somebody is looking at everything we do. We are the most watched people on earth. Every step we take, we have to be careful. If we put even one foot wrong, even one of the children, our world could end. And I don’t mean that in an imaginary way. It is a true fact.

“These people, my people, have no education except what we can provide for ourselves. Not one family owns, or will ever own, the house they live in. They are mostly owned, the houses, by either Mister Glass or those twin sisters you’re so fond of.

“And we go about our business, and we put up with it. Because there is nothing else we can do. Except believe, Mister Beale, except worship in a broken-down storefront we pay the rent on where we worship in peace, because we know that nobody in this town except us would ever set foot in there. Not even Mister Glass, who owns the place. Not even him, as long as he gets his rent every month. And he does. Every eye in this town is on us, even when we sleep.

“And we can’t stand it. We hide it, every day, all day, but it is hateful and intolerable. It makes our stomachs hurt. Because the one thing we can’t do, no matter how closely we’re watched, the one thing we can never do is ever look back. Do you understand what I’m saying, Mister Beale?”

“There’s no need to say any more, Mister Shadwell. I won’t be coming back.”

“I’m so . . .”

“No need to be. Tell the people thanks for having me. It meant something.”

“I hope so, Mister Beale. I hope so.”

“Tell them for me. Tell them I’ll remember.”

Then Shadwell, the Reverend Lewis Tobias Shadwell, as he came to be known, got up, and the two men shook hands, and he left, leaving Charlie alone in his cooling house with his quiet dog and no religion.

No religion except Sylvan Glass.

That night, lying in bed, he drew a crude portrait of her in his diary. He wasn’t an artist, but he tried to get her face and features down the way he remembered them. So he could look at her on the days of the week that weren’t Wednesday. So he would always have her near, even when he was very, very old.

And around her head he drew a halo, a perfect circle, and colored it in with gold.





