CHAPTER SIXTEEN

IT WAS GETTING too cold. Sam couldn’t wait in the truck any more.

So, on the third Wednesday, when they turned in the drive, and parked around back of the house, out of sight, Charlie came around and helped Sam down from the pickup, leaving Jackie Robinson in the cab. They walked over to the house, and the door opened as soon as they stepped on the porch. There was an awkward moment as Sam looked up at Mrs. Glass, wary about going into a house he didn’t know.

She was dressed, this time. High-heeled shoes, a navy blue dress with a red rose at the neck, her hair swept up in an impossible tangle of curls and ringlets, like something off a magazine cover. Bright red lips. Scarlet nails. A plastic bracelet on her arm as red as the rose on her neck.

The kitchen was hot, spotless, and it smelled good. Whatever else Boaty Glass spent all his money on, he didn’t spend it on extravagant things for his house. The floor was plain speckled linoleum, the kitchen table covered in checked oilcloth. There were straight, tall oak farm chairs, just two of them, as though there were never any guests expected; not a crumb on the floor or counter, covered in Formica the color of the inside of an avocado; frilly, frail curtains at the windows, the only touch of grace or care. On the walls, there were pictures of stern old folks in stiff positions, and sad-looking little girls with painted faces and frozen hands, a framed picture postcard of a big grand house with formal gardens and palm trees around it, behind a big, turquoise swimming pool—a souvenir of Hollywood.

The room opened onto two others, a sitting room filled with drab furniture, and a bright bedroom with an iron bed painted white, plain as dirt, but hung with some kind of filmy curtains all around the head of the bed, tied back with colorful ribbons and bows. Next to the bed was a yellowed photograph, a silver-framed picture of a pretty woman on her wedding day, long ago. A staircase led upstairs, to other rooms and other hallways, just like in Sam’s house. Bedrooms, he guessed.

Sam knew right away why it smelled good in the kitchen. She’d made cookies. They were piled on a blue willow plate on the kitchen table, next to two short stacks of magazines.

“Sam, say hello to Mrs. Glass. Be a good boy.”

“Hello, ma’am.”

“Hello, Sam,” she said, and he loved the sound of her voice, so young and sweet and fine. As though she had grown up in a beautiful flower garden far away. “I have some things for you.”

He walked toward the table. “I made cookies with nuts,” she said, “And I got you these.” She picked up one of the stacks. “Look, funny books.”

“I can’t read yet. I can almost read. My mama and daddy read to me every night.”

“These you can just look at the pictures and make up your own funny stories, out of your own head. Look. Captain America and Captain Marvel, and, look at this one, this is Donald Duck. He’s bobbing for apples, like at Halloween, but all he got was this big old mean lobster clamped down on his beak. Isn’t that funny?”

Sam laughed, but he really didn’t understand. He’d never seen a whole funny book, just the covers at the general store. He’d never seen a lobster, either, and he didn’t get the joke. He liked the other little ducks on the cover, wearing witch’s hats and riding broomsticks, dressed up for Halloween. But he was drawn right away to Captain Marvel, Jr, a dark-haired, dark-eyed boy like Sam, but older, about fourteen, dressed in blue and gold, with a red cape and strong arms, the kind of boy Sam wanted to be when he grew up, with a lightning bolt across his chest, standing on top of a chest of gold coins that flew everywhere, surrounded by fierce pirates, a masted ship in the harbor.

The books his parents read to him were more serious, The Wind in the Willows from his mother, or Mother Goose, and The Hardy Boys from his father. Sometimes his father would read him a wonderful strange book he had had since he was Sam’s age, Poppy Ott’s Pedigreed Pickles. Sam would follow the words on the page with his fingers while they read to him, and sometimes he would carefully pronounce the words, fixing them in his mind. He liked Frank and Joe Hardy, their small-town world filled with gangsters and spies and adventures that never seemed to happen in Brownsburg.

But these funny books were different, filled with colorful pictures and strange, exotic, dressed-up animals, and men in capes who looked almost like some of the people he knew. Charlie helped him into a chair, and he turned the pages of the thin-papered magazines, excited to see what would happen next.

“And if you get tired of the comics, you can use these . . .” she showed him a box of crayons and a pad of paper, “. . . and draw us some pretty pictures. Would you like that?”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“Sam,” Charlie squatted on his haunches by the chair, “Mrs. Glass and I are going to go upstairs for a little while, so you be a good boy, and don’t make any noise, and just keep yourself busy and have some cookies. Do you think that’ll be OK?”

“I think so. What’s a lobster, Beebo?”

“I’ll tell you later, on the way home. Just be patient. And don’t come in the room.”

Charlie and Mrs. Glass went up the stairs, and Sam was alone in the kitchen with his picture books and his cookies. He should have been happy, but he wasn’t. He worried about Jackie Robinson in the cold. He didn’t like being left in a strange room where something was going on in another room but he didn’t know what it was. He found it hard to look at the books or eat the cookies.

It was completely quiet for a little while. Then something like voices, like whispers, came through the floor, but no sounds of feet moving. They must be sitting down, Sam thought, talking very quietly. But what were they talking about? Maybe they were talking about him, and that worried Sam. He’d been polite, he’d laughed at the duck even if he didn’t understand what was so funny, and he chewed on a cookie, trying to figure it out.

Then the noises began, tiny, soft noises blunted by the thickness of the floor, and all the more mysterious for that. He heard music playing above him, and a woman’s voice singing. It wasn’t hillbilly music. It was some other kind, softer, with other instruments playing.

Maybe they were dancing. Dancing slow.

He knew it was part of the secret. And he knew, he felt it in his skin, that he must never tell, about the music, or the funny books with strange pictures his mother wouldn’t approve of, or being left alone in the kitchen with the dog in the car, or about the cookies and the milk. He understood he must never say anything about this whole day. He wasn’t here. They weren’t here, Sam or Charlie or Mrs. Glass. He just knew that.

He stopped reading or eating. He just sat. He just sat and listened.

Sometimes it sounded like Charlie and the woman were laughing. Sometimes it sounded like Charlie was in pain, and his heart raced with fear for Beebo. If Beebo got hurt, how would he get home? He heard what must have been shoes dropping on the floor, and more laughing, giggling from her. Then it was really quiet again.

But only for a little bit. He heard Charlie groan and what sounded almost like a wail from the woman, followed quickly by Charlie’s low voice, different, harder, as he said quickly, “Hush, Sylvan. Hush.” Sam heard that. And then she was quiet as church during prayers, silent as his room when his mother turned out the light at night.

Maybe they were dead.

After what seemed like a long time, a door opened, and Charlie came down. He looked different, strange and young and sleepy and excited all at the same time. His shoes were in his hand, and he sat down on the other chair and started putting them on. He wouldn’t look at Sam as he laced them up, and the boy pretended to be reading the books and took a few bites of a cookie.

They both looked up, and Mrs. Glass was standing in the doorway. She was barefoot, too. She wasn’t wearing her dress any more, just a white, silky slip like his mother wore under her dress. Her face was pale, and all the red was gone from her lips. Her hair was tangled down around her shoulders. She just stood there, in her slip and her bracelet, smoking a cigarette in a short cigarette holder. Her lips looked plump and rounder and pink as a baby’s. She didn’t say anything to anybody, and nobody spoke to her.

Charlie stood up, tightened his belt, and reached for his coat. “Ready to go, Sam?” His voice was soft and kind, almost like a woman’s. “Get your coat on, we’re leaving.” Charlie kept his eyes on Mrs. Glass the whole time, not even noticing that Sam had never taken his coat off in the first place.

Sam started to put the few crayons back in the box. Charlie looked around briefly, “Don’t bother with that now. It’s all right. We have to go.”

They moved to the door. Sam knew he was supposed to leave the funny books on the table. The woman finished her cigarette and moved back into the next room and they heard her going slowly up the staircase. She never even said good-bye.

In the truck, Charlie held Jackie Robinson to his chest and kissed the top of his head. He put his arm out, gently, and touched Sam’s hair.

“If they ask why we’re late, just tell them Mr. Potter was late getting to the slaughterhouse with the beef. Okay?”

“Okay, Beebo.”

The truck didn’t catch at first, but then it did. They backed up and turned around, and headed down the driveway. Charlie turned onto the road without even looking, but there weren’t any cars on the road, so nobody got hurt.

There was a scratch on Charlie’s neck, no more than the length of Sam’s little finger, but a drop of blood had hardened on the end just above his shirt collar. His coat was open, as though he couldn’t feel the cold, even though the truck took a while to heat up. Sam shivered and rubbed his hands together. Even after the heat of the kitchen, once he was in the cold of the truck he felt as though he would never ever be warm again.





