CHAPTER NINETEEN

SHE HAD ON a green cardigan sweater, worn backward, buttoned up the back. It was exactly the color of her eyes, and she knew it. The lady who sold it to her, at Grossman’s, had pointed that out to her—that green, the color of the lichen that grew on the sides of the trees that rose from the side of the river. Her eyes the same, lichen green, almost gray in some lights, at certain times of day, but always with an undercurrent of green. Eyes like bright, quick fish swimming in winter water, they never stopped moving, never gazed at anything for very long, except for Charlie, and except for her own face, which she could look at for hours in the mirror.

She sat on the porch steps at Pickfair, the cool early summer breeze just barely lifting her blonde hair, blonder now, from the nape of her neck, and she pulled her skirt down over her knees and leaned forward, hugging her arms around her legs, her head resting on the turquoise cotton of a billowing skirt.

“I was listening to the radio one time, and something funny happened,” she said.

Charlie, hearing her voice, loved her so much at that moment he felt his heart might explode in his chest at any minute. He loved her so much he felt his bones would break. Loving her was like lying in a bed of nettles, and the feel of her skin against his was the only balm, the only time the stinging stopped, while, for her, he was the warm bath she took to stave off the cold waterfall of Boaty’s indifference.

“It was my show, you know, The Romance of Helen Trent. I just love her. I love the way she stands up for herself, struggles to the top of her profession. But I especially love the way she talks. I wish I could meet her one day.

“Anyway, she and Gil, her boyfriend, was . . .”

“Were.” said Charlie. “They were . . .”

“Thank you. Were talking, thank you, and Gil was asking her to marry him, the way he always does, even though he knows she’ll say no, he asks her because he loves her, and she loves him, too, but she can’t, you know, give herself to him because she has to think of her professional career, and all those people who would stab her in the back the first chance they got, just to get to the top before her. So she was saying no, and he kept asking her, and then something really funny happened. You want to know what it was?”

“I want to know why she won’t marry him,” Charlie said.

“I told you. Her professional career. Her duty to be the best Helen she can be. Like I said. She doesn’t want to be dashed against the rocks of despair. They tell you that at the beginning of every show. But you want to know what happened?”

“Sure.”

“So Gil was asking, and she was saying no, and then it went real quiet for a minute, and you could her a man’s voice, and he said it real loud, he said, ‘Ah, for Christ’s sake, why don’t you just lay the dame and get it over with!’ You could hear it clear as a bell.” She laughed, clear as music, and hugged her head to her knees, blushing at her own vulgarity. “It was real quiet for a long time, and then they just went right on, as though nothing had happened. Who would have said that?”

Charlie laughed, too, and sat beside her on the porch, and he said to her, “Helen Trent, marry me.”

She stopped laughing. She looked at him for a long, long time. “I can’t marry you. I don’t want to be dashed against the rocks of despair.”

Charlie pulled away and stood up.

“This is real life, Sylvan, not some radio show. Did you hear what I said? I said, ‘Marry me, Sylvan Glass.’ ”

They stayed that way, staring at each other a long time.

“Then maybe you should ask me again. Some other time. Maybe you should ask me a hundred times, the way Gil has asked Helen. He knows it’s hopeless, but he asks her. He always has faith. You should, too. Please, just not now.”

Charlie turned away, watched the boy playing in the yard. Sylvan tugged on his pants leg. He looked down as she spoke, “ ‘Now, for Christ’s sake, just lay the dame and get it over with.’ ”

He laughed, a short, harsh laugh. “I love you, Sylvan, in case you didn’t know. In case you hadn’t noticed by some chance.”

“I’m nothing so great.”

“No, sweetheart. You are. You’re wonderful. You’re wonderful to me. A wonderful girl. To me, Sylvan.”

And he showed her how he felt, again and again, and it never seemed enough to him. His words never got to the heart of what he felt in his whole body, exploding inside her. Next to that, he had so little way to tell her, his words seemed small and imprecise and mute. He never worried about getting her pregnant. He hoped sometimes that it would happen. Then it would be over, or then it would begin. Then maybe this ache would go away.

If she touched him by accident as they were walking along, or sitting next to each other in the car, even so much as the tip of her little finger against his as he shifted gears, he felt an electric shock. And then a calm like he’d never known, a complete peace, knowing that this woman had touched him, even accidentally. Such a gift, this girl. What a wonder.

He tried to show her, to make her believe, and he couldn’t. It was never enough. So he gave her things. He couldn’t give her anything that would be visible or noticeable to Boaty, like a necklace or a silk scarf, couldn’t give anything that would have to be explained, and so he gave her what he had. He gave her land.

First, there was the house, Pickfair. Then there were two others. Then there were five farms. He gave them to her with a free hand, in secret. With every deed, his love for her deepened, and his hope expanded. She was no longer a hillbilly nobody from nowhere, sold quickly to the first bidder. She was a woman of property. She owned things. He tried and tried to explain it to her. She could, one day, he said, be free.

Every time he gave away one of the parcels of his land, he felt more owned, as though he had given her another piece of himself, of his heart, of his body. He was enraptured by her entitlement. In love with her ownership of what was his. It enhanced his affections, as the landscape of her body became more and more featured, particular, dotted with waterfalls and ravines and pine groves and a white house in the woods.

He hoped she would leave her husband. He hoped that more and more as each deed was signed. There was no longer any reason for her to stay with him, not that he knew of, and Charlie found it hard to accept her reluctance, her refusal.

“We’ll see” was all she would say. “We’ll see.”

Summer deepened, and still he waited. She was young. She was uncertain of herself. All that would change, he knew. He hoped it would.

Her reluctance aroused him even more, to greater and stronger acts of dominion and submission. Intoxicating, but useless and hopeless, in the end. She lay with him, and he knew he could posses her but never own her. Like a fish in a bowl, she darted this way and that, unknowable, wholly created from her own imagination and the images she watched flickering on the screen, platinum and ebony. Her moods changed like the clouds over the Blue Ridge, and sudden gusts of weather would come across her, chilling or warming their conversation, their lovemaking, but that made no difference to him. Now that he had asked her, told her what his intentions were, he wanted to feel the rush to the conclusion, to consummation. But she ran from freezing to feverish, showing nothing. Her darkening cold was as heated to him as her sudden, inexplicable, and luminous fire.





