CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

SHE LAY IN bed for two weeks, and did nothing but weep. She wept so hard, so convulsively, that her body hurt. When she got up, finally, he beat her so badly she was in bed for another week. There was, for her, no longer anything to hold on to, nothing to let go of. Except one thing: She still had her secret, the pieces of paper locked beneath the floorboards of the attic.

When she got up, it was to be Mrs. Harrison Glass, nothing more than that. Her Hollywood finery, all her fancy things, stayed shut away, and she passed her days in house dresses that hid her shape and showed her station. Until one day, five days after she could get out of bed and the swelling had gone down, she took all that stuff, those dresses that Claudie had spent hours and hours making, the green dress she had worn when she pulled the boy from the water, all that dressing up for Charlie, for show, for pretend, she took it all out into the backyard and poured gasoline all over her clothes and set it all on fire, watching as the person she had tried to be went up in flames. She cried as she watched them burn up. Her clothes. Her self. If she was not to be the thing she had dreamed of being, what, then, was she to be? Who was she?

Why wasn’t everything the way it was in the movies? Why had the screen gone dark? When she made up the character she had played, her face flickering with the luminosity of the silver screen in her shining eyes, who was it she was supposed to be? The flames told her nothing. She was an unschooled country girl who had learned everything she knew from people who were not real, and she had loved Charlie Beale, that much was sure. And she had known, briefly, blindly, the moment she had waited for, in the dark.

There ain’t nothing after this, she thought. There is no after.

He had been her whole movie, her movie star, but had she loved him? She had loved the way he looked, his posture, the way he moved, the way he laughed quietly with the boy over some man’s foolishness, fish or bird or rock, she had loved him before he ever came to her that first time, but then he had come, and he was no longer the flickering brightness she saw behind her lids when she closed her eyes at night and let in the dark, let him in to steal her heart and her soul, in the dark, in her dreams. When he had come, he had been smells, and skin, and a mouth that was all over her, and his weight scared her, his hands, his body, so real, so tight and muscled, smaller than her own, but coiled with power and need, need of her and for her, an endless need that was not a dream, that did not flicker, that was never-ending, and she couldn’t have that, couldn’t accept it, couldn’t endure it, and so she had shut the door in his face, had turned out the lights and sat in the dark, every inch of her skin wanting every inch of his skin, just like in the movie, shutting him out, the only natural man she’d ever known, the fullest, richest being who had ever come to her, and she just couldn’t take it.

She told herself that she had acted to save her parents the misery of loss, to pay back a debt of care that was owed. She told herself that she did it because Boaty would have killed him. But she dimly knew somehow that she did it because she preferred the fantasy of the movie in her mind to the reality of Charlie Beale.

So now she wandered her husband’s property in her plain housecoat, widowed but still married, in mourning for a man she had never really known. She crawled into thickets and lay down in the cool damp of the autumn woods and touched herself, remembering his hands on her, feeling the waves of pleasure, imagining him again, but this time as a shadow without weight or breath, without smell or sound or a hunger that surpassed her own.

She knew that she had ruined his life. She was not unaware. But men recover. They go on. He was forty years old, and filled with a desire and a craziness for love that was too big, too desperate. She was pretty sure that his heart had been broken before, and hadn’t he come to her anyway?

The leaves fell around her in the woods, the birds flew south, as she sat with her skirt hiked up around her waist and tried to play in her head the movie in which she could live out the rest of her life, the never-ending reel of her fantasy.

She called Boaty Mister Glass, now, when she was with him. He called her nothing, slept apart, wouldn’t touch her or come near her. He seemed to be figuring out what to do with her. Throw her out, yes, but she’d cost a lot of money, and you don’t throw good equipment away. She made his supper, and behaved herself, as far as he could tell, and she’d taken down those foolish pictures and burned up her embarrassing clothes, and stopped her damned talk of Hedy Lamarr and such, so, for now, he’d just wait and see how she turned out.

He was older. He’d never been attractive. He just didn’t have the taste for the hunt right now. Besides, the horse was already out of the barn. He saw the looks in people’s faces, felt their eyes on his back when he walked away. A man whose wife had cheated on him. They’d been snickering at him all his grown life, so what if they snickered now?

Besides, now that the truth was out, or whatever version of it people took to be the truth, he was freed from the awful burden of having to touch her, visit her in the night, and all that mess was behind him. No more romancing. Better his own hands, his magazines, in his mother’s bed, in the dark, and breakfast on the table.

He couldn’t stand her now, couldn’t take the sight of her for very long, but, as long as his house was clean and his food was on the table, why look for more trouble? She belonged to him, bought with good money, and he didn’t feel much like throwing out good property.

No, he would keep her, keep her like Rapunzel in her tower, knowing that no prince would come near her, ever again. He would put up with the stares and the snide grins, knowing that they’d go away, in time. He’d even put up with having to see Charlie Beale every now and then, as long as the man didn’t open his mouth or look at him in any way. Truth is, Boaty was both lazy and a coward, and he knew that confronting Charlie would take a whole lot of doing, and that Charlie would probably kill him if he tried any funny stuff on him. If the man had any sense, he’d just go away, the same way he’d come, back to wherever he came from, or onto the next new place and the next man’s wife.

One day Sylvan took the car keys from where she knew Boaty had hidden them—he wasn’t that complicated—and she drove into town to see Claudie Wiley, but Claudie, even though her car was parked right in front of her house, wouldn’t open the door when she knocked, again and again. Finally she drew back the blind on the glass-paned door—because she was in business and maybe it was a customer with a hem or an alteration—and stared straight at Sylvan for a full minute, before she let the curtain drop and disappeared back into the silence of her house, her life measured out in stitches. Claudie would never open the door to her again. She’d open it to any other woman with a bolt of cloth and a dream, but not to her.

Sylvan drove into Lexington and walked into the State Theater one more time, not even looking up to see what was on the marquee. She sat herself down in her usual seat, thinking for a second of Claudie upstairs in the Negro balcony with her sketch pad, thinking of the days when that had been good and possible, and then she drew a breath as the lights went down and the picture began to roll on the screen. The same silver light, the same bright faces with their handsome, big features that seemed to throw off light into a darkened world, but there was nothing there for her. Not any more. She left the theater, walking out into the blinding fall sunshine of Nelson Street, searching for her car keys in her purse, trying to see her way through the blinding, chilly brightness, back to her car, back to her life, back to her self. Back to being a country girl she did not know and had never known.





