CHAPTER ELEVEN

THERE WERE TWO things Charlie Beale wanted, and neither one was a woman.

The first thing he wanted was a dog. He said it wasn’t so much that he himself wanted a dog, although deep down in his heart he felt that if you had a house you ought to have a dog, but that Sam wanted a dog and couldn’t have one. That boy talked about it every single day, bringing it up time after time as though it had never been discussed before. He knew every dog on the street by name, and there was a kind of mournful, tender wonder in his eyes every time he put his hand on a dog’s head to pat it.

The second thing was land. Charlie wanted to amass acreage the way boys collect baseball cards or young men collect broken-down cars, hoping to take the parts and put them all together one day into a sleek, fast, girl-attracting ride.

Maybe it was because Charlie wasn’t a big man and wanted the armor that land would provide him. Or maybe because it was that, for so long, he had lacked a sense of place, of belonging. It was beautiful, this land in the Valley of Virginia, and Charlie hungered for beauty.

Obviously, one thing was a small thing and the other one was a big thing. But both dogs and land were everywhere around him, and at least he knew exactly which dog he wanted, the dog he thought Sam might like, because he’d seen Andy Myers’s place on one of his many drives around the county when he first got there.

Andy Myers had more dogs than children, and he had a gang of children. He bred both for use and pleasure, the dogs to hunt and sit by his feet in the evening, and the children for chores. The beagles were brindled and content, the children freckled and happy with their lot.

Charlie drove out there and looked over the new dogs, a twelve-week-old litter.

“You hunt?” Andy asked him.

“Don’t,” Charlie said. “Not against it. I just never got the idea of killing for pleasure.”

“I kill to eat.”

“Well, see, that’s sort of my business,” Charlie said, looking at the squirming mass of puppies around his feet. He loved their spots, and the colors splashed on their skins, honey and black and white, the way their tongues hung from their mouths. He felt like he was five years old again, just picking out his first dog. “I’m a butcher by trade, and I never go hungry.”

“I don’t sell house dogs, or yard dogs. I sell hunting dogs.”

“He can go hunting with Will Haislett.”

“Oh, you a friend of Will’s? His mother was my mother’s second cousin. I don’t know what that makes him and me, but his people and my people are buried in the same graveyard, so I guess that makes us family. Sure, you can have a dog. Male or female? There’s both.”

“I want that one, the strong one, the male.”

“He’ll make a good hunting dog. I was thinking of keeping that one for myself.” But Charlie figured that’s what Andy always said, just to get another dollar or two.

“How much?”

“For that one? Any other one, I’d take fifteen, but that one, I got to get more.”

“Eighteen.”

“Least twenty.”

“I’m not going to argue about two dollars. He’s the one, and twenty happens to be exactly what I’d planned on spending.” When Andy saw the roll of bills Charlie took out of his pocket, he looked at it like he wished he’d started at twenty and gone up from there. Now he couldn’t go back, so Charlie put the dog in the cab of his truck, squirming beside him in the quilt he’d brought, and drove on home.

Sam was beside himself that night. At first, he just stared at the dog, but then he laughed. “Can I pet him?” He looked at his mother.

“Of course, Sam.”

The puppy took to him right away. Soon, they were on the floor of the porch together, rolling and tumbling. “Be gentle, Sam,” Charlie said softly. “He’s just a baby.”

They all played with the puppy until it was time for Sam to go to bed. The next morning, the boy was back before breakfast, practically before it was light, and Charlie sat on the porch with his coffee, and he and Sam named the dog. Charlie’d been thinking about it all night.

“Sam, I’ve got two choices for you. We could name him Popeye. You know, from the funny papers. That’s kind of nice. Or we could name him Jackie Robinson.” Sam had been astonished when, a few weeks before, Jackie Robinson had hit a home run, a triple, a double, and a single, all in the same game.

Sam looked the dog in the eye. “Jackie Robinson!” he cried, and the dog cocked his head at the sound. “See? See, Beebo? He knows his name already!”

So Charlie laughed, and that was that. Charlie took the dog to work with him every day. It wasn’t quite legal, a dog in a butcher’s shop, if anybody looked into it, but nobody minded, and even Boaty Glass thought it was a fine-looking dog.

“Crazy name,” he said. “Calling a dog after a nigger. Make a good hunting dog, though.”

“Not going to hunt him, sir. Not this dog.” Charlie looked up from cutting.

“Better not let him near a chicken coop, then. Those beagles get a taste of blood, they never stop. Got to hunt ’em or shoot ’em.”

After he left, as he was writing Boaty’s purchases in his book, Will said, “Boaty don’t much care for pets. He’s already got a pet.”

“What’s that?” Charlie asked.

“That wife of his.”

So the little thing was done, and Charlie started on the big thing. The county was six hundred square miles, and criss-crossed with two-lane blacktop that went mostly from nowhere to nowhere, often deadending in desolation and wilderness.

Every Sunday afternoon, he got into his truck with his suitcase and his dog, and he drove. The roads were narrow and winding, not always paved, and he looked at everything in the whole county, even though he didn’t know what he was looking for. He just knew he’d know it when he saw it.

He drove out to Goshen Pass, along the Maury River, and past, to the town of Goshen, where the train came through. He ate his lunch at Cozy Corners, the diner where you could buy beer on Sundays. Charlie didn’t buy beer, but he ate ham and biscuits, and flirted with the waitresses, girls who’d never been anywhere in their whole lives, even though the train came through every day on its way to Staunton and beyond, places they dreamed about in their girlish way, New York or Chicago, big cities where girls just like them worked in offices and wore lipstick and smoked on the street. But they knew they’d never get to any of these places, and they thought, well, maybe that’s just as well.

He drove to Lexington, the county seat, and Natural Bridge, with its old hotel where famous people had come to stay and rock on the porch in the cool evenings, and Collierstown, where the best beef came from. In all of these towns, he never even got out of his truck.

More times than not, he would find himself at the end of the day driving by Boaty Glass’s house, looking, always hoping to see her in the yard, and once he did, and he slowed the car down, and rolled down the window, but then he couldn’t think of anything to say to her. She turned her whole body to follow him, putting those green eyes on him, and maybe she heard him and maybe she didn’t when he finally said a shy “Hey” and gave a small wave that she didn’t return and then he drove on. I’m here, he wanted to say, would have said if his throat hadn’t gone dry at the sight of her. I’m here. I’m the one.

It was the beauty of the land that enraptured him, and he drove until it was dark and there was hardly any traffic on the road any more, talking to Jackie Robinson, telling him about the sights, the sparkling river, the stacks of timber in Goshen waiting for the train to come and take them off to all those places the girls would never go. Every now and then he stopped the truck by the side of the road and he got out. Maybe a field of goldenrod caught his eye, or a carpet of yellow swaying in the breeze, a stand of pines or maples, or a little spring where the water was sweet enough to drink.

He went to the old hotel where the auction had been, the remnants of which now filled his own house, and he liked the way it looked, abandoned and melancholy but still proud, something built in the days of a war that was over a half century before he was born, a war that changed everything, a war that people still talked about as though it were still happening at that very minute. Once he even broke into the hotel and wandered the empty halls and imagined the generals and their wives who had come to escape the heat in Richmond or Louisiana, the military posture relaxing just a little in the cool night air, and the long skirts of the ladies, coming and going.

The countryside just stole his heart at every turn of the road. It just broke him down and put him back together. It was wild and it was gentle. It was a comfort to his soul. Sweet Virginia.

AFTER A FEW WEEKS, he had learned to separate the land he liked from the land that truly grabbed hold of his heart, and when he saw something that made his heart beat in a certain way, he would get out, climb through the barbed wire fence, or hike up the hillside, and he would feel the sun on his face and the wind would lift his hair from his forehead, and Jackie Robinson would sniff the air, or run around in circles, or chase wild turkeys, and Charlie would just know that he had to have it.

Sometimes he would take off his clothes and just lie down with the dog in the field or the forest, and sleep for ten minutes with a peace in his heart he had never known.

Buying those places he wanted wasn’t hard. There was so much land, and it wasn’t worth much.

In the diary he always brought with him, he would write down carefully the location, the county road number, the specifics of what he had seen. Sometimes there would be a farmhouse in view, and he would knock on the door and find out if he had the right owner, and they would agree on a price. Sometimes it was ten acres. Sometimes it was a hundred, once five hundred.

He never paid less than eighteen dollars an acre, and he never paid more than thirty. He gave a good, honest price, and he never left an owner feeling cheated. When the price was agreed, he went to his truck, opened his suitcase, carefully counted out the money and paid every farmer in cash. “The only money that counts,” he’d always say, “is cash money.”

He wrote it all down in his book, sometimes drawing a crude map, or a sketch of what it was about that particular piece of land that made it so special to him. There was always something in a piece of land that cracked his heart wide open.

On Monday mornings, when business got slow after the morning rush, he went to Bobby Hostetter, the lawyer, and they made it all legal. The owners came in, in their town clothes still smelling of strong laundry soap and the hot iron, and the papers were drawn up and left to be registered at the county courthouse, in Lexington.

He asked Will one day, “Who owns the most land in town?”

“Never thought about it. But it’s got to be Boaty Glass. You could look it up.”

Everybody knew he was doing it. Land sales were published in the Rockbridge Gazette: the acreage, the sale price, the seller, the buyer. People talked about it in quiet voices on Wednesday evenings as they sat on their porches, reading the paper. But nobody talked about it to Charlie. He was a stranger, and strangers do funny things, and he saw something, they figured, in the county land they never gave much thought to.

Charlie Beale had his reasons, but he kept them to himself, the way he did everything else. There was a reason, though, and he knew it in his heart. A reason to build an empire, to make an impression. The reason had a name, and that name, ever since that first day in the butcher shop when she walked into his life in a white linen dress, the reason his travels almost always took him by her house, that name was Sylvan Glass.





