CHAPTER TWENTY

CLAUDIE, GO TO the movies with me.”

“Why’d I want to do that for, girl?” The black woman gathered the sky-blue linen in her fingers, took a straight pin from a cloth strawberry strapped to her wrist, and pinned down the pleats at Sylvan’s hip. It was a new season, and Sylvan had seen new things in the magazines, so they’d gone to Staunton and bought bolts of cloth to make her wardrobe all over again. She was being created like a Hollywood starlet, pleat by pleat. She was a creature of fantasy in a small town in the middle of nowhere that knew too much of how hard reality really was, a town that looked on her and her strange friendship with this odd black woman with a mixture of amusement and violent hatred. Their friendship—there was nothing else like it around. The blacks were there for a reason. Friendship wasn’t it.

“Moving pictures are a great thing. They’re everything it isn’t around here. They’re beautiful beautiful. They make you laugh even if you’re blue. Everything is different, all the time. And the people, they’re so beautiful.”

Claudie knew, because Claudie knew everything, exactly who Sylvan was, who her people were, and she knew that friendship with a white woman was a thing that wasn’t supposed to be. It just didn’t happen. But, like most of the things she didn’t care about, which was pretty much everything except her daughter, she didn’t care about that, either. She liked the hillbilly girl. Sylvan didn’t talk fancy around her, she knew better, so, when she talked to Claudie, you could still hear the lonesomeness of her girlhood in the valley, out there.

Like all white women, Sylvan asked too many questions, as though there were things she thought she had a right to know, even though they weren’t any of her business. White people thought black people didn’t have lives and business of their own, and maybe that was true for most. But Claudie Wiley didn’t belong to anybody, and never had, and never would.

“Where’s your little girl?”

“Up the stairs, where she always is.” Nobody ever went upstairs, beyond the room where Claudie sewed. Not everybody even got that far. If Claudie didn’t feel like answering the door’s knock, she just peeked out of the curtain and ignored it.

“Don’t she ever go out? I never seen her anywhere.”

“She doesn’t go out. Not for years.”

“Why?”

“It makes her kind of shy to go out on the street. She’s grown already. It’s her decision. Not one friend in the world. They laughed at her and she don’t want to mess with them any more. There’s reasons.”

“What reasons?”

“If you knew her, you’d know the reasons.”

“People say she’s . . . she’s . . .”

“I know what them people say.”

“It must be hard having a daughter like that.”

“Like what?” Claudie was getting shaper and stonier with every word.

“Like people say she is. Not right.”

“She’s fine. People talk too much. We have a life. It’s fine. We don’t care about them people.”

“What’s her name?”

“Evelyn. Evelyn Hope Wiley.”

“Who’s her father? Where is he?”

Claudie shot her a look that stopped conversation. A hard look. She sewed for a while, and at least the girl knew enough to say nothing while Claudie’s fingers flew in and out of the linen around her hips.

Finally she spoke, a mouth full of pins.

“He was just a boy. He had a way about him, yes, he did. I didn’t want to, I told him no, but he had a way. He was handsome and smart. I have to say that. He was the first. I didn’t tell nobody till I got to the point where something had to be said, and, even then, I wouldn’t tell his name. He got killed in the war. His name was Lomax. Nineteen. He didn’t even know he had a baby.”

She sewed. “You want to see her? Would that end this con­versation??”

“I’d love to meet her.”

Claudie looked at her with pure hatred. She got up and went to the bottom of the stairs and called out, softly, “Evelyn Hope? Mama needs you. Would you come downstairs?”

Then she turned and stared hard at Sylvan as they listened to the footsteps on the stairs, slow, light. “She ain’t no circus animal, you know.”

More footsteps, and then there she was.

She was tall, taller than Claudie, and slender and pretty. And she was white.

“Say hello to Mrs. Glass, Evelyn Hope.”

“Hello, ma’am,” the girl said. “How are you today?”

“I’m fine, Evelyn Hope,” said Sylvan. “It’s lovely to meet you. You’re a lovely girl. You must be very happy.”

“I’m fine,” said the girl. “Mama? Did you need me for something?”

“I always need you, child. But not now. You can go back upstairs, honey. I’ll come up soon.”

“Nice to meet you,” said Evelyn Hope, and she curtsied to Sylvan who, absurdly, curtsied back. Then she retreated into the shadows and up the stairs.

Claudie turned in a rage. “Now, girl. Is that enough? Her father was white. A white boy. Is that enough? Enough to know?”

“I think so.”

“Good. She stays inside. The black people don’t want her, and the white people won’t have her, even to scrub their floors. You’re the last person on God’s earth to figure this out.”

“Why Evelyn Hope?”

“I just liked the sound. Like music. Evelyn Hope. She sits in her room all day. She listens to the radio. She smokes cigarettes. She hasn’t been out of the house since she was five.”

“And how old is Evelyn now? Evelyn Hope.” She saw the look, quick as a match striking, felt the needle prick her hip.

“She is nineteen years old.”

“So you’re . . .”

“Older than Jesus was when he died.”

“It’s hard to tell.”

“Most folks around here, they know how old I am to the minute. People round here just know too damned much. They been watching us, you and me. If we go to them movies, they just be watching us harder.”

“If you think I care, you’re wrong.”

“That’s because you’re rich. And you’re white. You don’t have to care.”

“But we’re friends.”

“Yes, we are. We are friends. In this room. At this minute.”

“I don’t have any other friends. Not one.”

Sylvan didn’t speak for a long time, then she repeated, “Well, I do. I do have one friend.”

Claudie adjusted the tucks at the hip. She looked out at the window, didn’t even flinch when Claudie pricked her again with a needle. She wondered if Claudie had heard her.

“Yes. Yes I do. I have somebody.”

“That make you happy?”

“It’s the only thing I’ve ever known that made me happy. The only thing that’s ever belonged to me. Person. Him, I mean. I love him, I do, and the only way I can show it is to not say one word about him, ever. That’s what he said. Understand, Claudie? Nobody.”

Claudie nodded.

“But he’s not, you know, he’s not a friend. That’s not what I mean.”

“I know what you mean. So why don’t you be with him?”

“I’m married.”

“Get unmarried. White people can do that.”

“It’s not that easy.”

“It never is.”

“It is in the movies. Things just happen. It’s divine. Go to the movies with me.”

And one day they did. Claudie Wiley was the first black woman in Brownsburg to ride in the front seat of a car being driven by a white woman. People, knowing what they already knew and didn’t talk about, figured riding with Claudie right beside her was just another example of the hillbilly girl’s recklessness, and they knew that when Boaty heard about it, he’d be madder about this than he would be about the other.

The movie was called On the Town, and it was about three sailors who had only one day to see New York City and find true love. Sylvan paid for two tickets, but then she and Claudie had to go in different doors to get to the movie theater, and Claudie had to sit upstairs in the balcony, the only person up there, a black woman alone in the dark in the middle of the afternoon. And there was all of New York, in Technicolor, spread out before her, a city she might have seen or even lived in, once upon a time. She wondered why she would want to sit in the dark alone and watch a bunch of white people singing and dancing and kissing in a big town she would never ever see, and she scanned the silvery screen for one single black face and there wasn’t one, not a single solitary one, except way in the background.

She sat, with her sketch pad, and she drew the clothes the women wore, the lines quick and deft. She knew exactly which dress Sylvan would want, as soon as she saw it, and then she saw more of it, what it did, how it moved as some woman tap-danced through a museum in it, and she drew faster, capturing every detail, until she was practically sewing it right there in the movies, feeling the cloth in her hands, almost, and the swirl of the skirt floating around the legs of the beautiful Southern girl sitting downstairs with the white people. Not for her, no, never for her, these things, and certainly not for Evelyn Hope, although Claudie did sometimes make party clothes for both of them, things out of Vogue. She would make one dress for herself, a fancy ball gown of intricate structure and drape, and an identical one for Evelyn Hope, and even a tiny one just as rich and fine for Eveleyn Hope’s doll baby, a little white thing she carried with her everywhere, the fine blonde curls of the doll’s hair now a rat’s nest of carelessness and age. They wore these dresses at night when she made a roast and a cake for herself and her daughter, dressed like princesses in the tumultuous dark maw of her house, by candlelight, the mice scurrying in the cupboards as they ate stringy lamb and rich chocolate cake. Party clothes, clothes that had nothing to do with their real lives, so that her decrepit house was turned into a kind of palace.

But this dress in the movie, this green dress, she knew without even asking that it was for Sylvan. She even heard Sylvan call out once, during the movie, “Claudie?” and she knew, she knew that she would be making it for her.

It was kelly green, tight in the body and full in the skirt, with buttons from the hem to the collar, a collar that was rolled, and made of a black-and-white tartan silk, all of it silk, and fine. But it was when the woman in the dress moved and started dancing that they both, upstairs and down, saw the magic of the dress. As Ann Miller danced, the dress unbuttoned by degrees, and they saw, both of them, that the dress was lined in the same black-and-white tartan as the collar, the portrait collar that showed off her beautiful collarbones and neck, and set her rather vulgar face aglow with a smile that women had only in the movies.

That’s when Sylvan called Claudie’s name: when the dress came undone and the lining swirled into the air around the woman’s thighs. Silk like a bird’s wings, fluttering at her hips, her frantic legs, the skirt graceful and green and billowing with flashes of black and white, all elegant, all moving, in motion. It was the fact that the dress—what made it special—only revealed itself after the initial effect had come and gone that excited both of them, as though the dress held a secret, and only told the secret when the time came. Like their hearts: the two women, both of them, not telling much of what both knew, holding back, keeping still even as they flew through their lives. Sylvan had a lover. Claudie had a daughter, upstairs in that mess, upstairs forever, and little was said and much was accepted as being true.

The sailors and their girls got into all kinds of escapades, and there was kissing and more singing and dancing. But nothing really mattered after the green dress. Even Frank Sinatra, with his boyish charm, or Gene Kelly, with his strong legs and the sexy scar on his cheek, did little to excite their hearts, flush with excitement upstairs and down at the prospect of making that dress for Sylvan to wear.

Sylvan didn’t want to kiss any of those men, and she didn’t want to dance with them or by herself, and she didn’t want to be any of those women. She just wanted the feel of the swirling silk against the skin of her body, and she wanted the daring leg and the pure float of the thing as she twirled, in private, for Charlie Beale, maybe in the woods, barefooted on the spring moss, her dress greener than anything in the forest around her, greener than the newest and lightest leaf.

They went straight from the theater to the one small department store. They didn’t stop to eat anything, since there was only the one place, and they couldn’t walk in there together, anyway, and even in the store, they pretended that they didn’t know each other, just walked through the aisles of material, looking only for the silk they wanted and the tartan that made the whole thing work. They didn’t find the exact thing, but, through gestures and glances, they found things that would work, that would do, and they chose these, and Claudie stood by the door while the salesgirl cut the cloth and wrapped the two pieces of material in brown paper bundles and Sylvan paid with money from her pocketbook. They walked out onto the street where it was still daylight and drove back to Brownsburg in the big Buick, happy in their day and the company they had kept, not talking at all until Sylvan finally said, as they pulled into the outskirts of the town, “See, Claudie? Wasn’t it wonderful? That’s the movies.”





