CHAPTER SEVEN

BUT ALL IN all, Boaty Glass was pretty pleased with himself. The next day, he drove his new wife into Lexington to get some clothes, the kind of clothes that might make the other women in the town turn their heads. They went to Grossman’s. Almost every Southern town has one clothing store run by Jewish people, and in Lexington it was the Grossmans who kept the ladies looking up to date. Boaty watched as Sylvan tried on the clothes, and he got more and more pleased with himself every time she came out of the dressing room. She had a nice figure on her, full and round, and the Grossmans looked her up and down and pulled out things that looked like they had been made just for her. It gave him a funny feeling in his heart, watching her, a rush to wrap it all up, the dresses and the suits and the hats and gloves she had to be taught to wear, and take her back home, dress her up, and just walk her up and down the main street in Brownsburg all day long.

In Arthur and Ginger Grossman’s hands, Sylvan became the thing he had driven all those miles on all those country roads to find, had sat in all those parlors in Staunton and Charlottesville, drinking cups of condescending tea under stony unforgiving glances so he could bring her home. She might be the fake version of that thing, but, like they say, when she stood on top of Boaty’s money, she stood pretty tall.

She had a natural grace to her, in the way she walked, in the way her hands moved up to rearrange her hair or smooth an eyebrow. And she seemed to take Boaty as he came, his hulking body with that faint smell of sweat, his age, whatever it was, and she didn’t know and didn’t seem to care—as long as he was older than eighteen, he might as well have been a hundred. He kind of loved her, but then, he loved his car the way he loved his money, and he had loved his sainted mother, but this girl was not his delicate mother. This was a flesh-and-blood woman. He’d seen her naked. He never got up the courage to ask himself whether she loved him, too.

Some things he had to teach her, like how to hold a fork and knife in the right way, how to put a napkin in her lap, but most things he only had to tell her once. She was that quick.

The first time he took her to town, to church on Sunday, she caused a stir. She turned some heads. She was by far the prettiest girl in town, and she made the other teenaged girls look unfinished, somehow. She was voluptuous where they were meager, and, of course, she was married to Boaty, and everybody knew the desperate and disastrous course of Boaty’s various courtships. Nobody knew who she was, exactly, except Alma, who remembered from her days of going out to Arnold’s Valley and trying to teach those children some few simple facts about the world, and Alma knew the girl wouldn’t remember her, or, if she did, she wouldn’t acknowledge their acquaintance, so Alma didn’t say anything, except to Will, later, at lunch, and Will laughed his head off. “Arnold’s Valley?” He laughed at the whole idea.

Then Will told just one or two people, and that was enough, so by the end of the week, everybody in town knew exactly who she was and where and what she had come out of. But still. But still.

She didn’t talk like a hillbilly, that was the remarkable thing. She didn’t talk like anybody in Brownsburg, anybody in the county. She talked like somebody you’d hear on the radio, which, of course, was where she’d learned to talk like that in the first place. She talked like Helen Trent.

Boaty liked showing her off, and so, once he felt Brownsburg had been suitably impressed, he took her back into Lexington, where they had supper at the Dutch Inn. Then they went to the movies. The movies cost a quarter apiece, but they also cost him—and Boaty didn’t know this at the time, how could he?—they also cost him much much more. The movies cost him his wife, because after the lights went down in the State Theater, and the first image flickered on the screen, and she saw those enormous, beautiful faces and heard them talking in that way that didn’t sound like any country except the country of the movies, Sylvan never belonged to him again. From that night on, she belonged, body and soul, to the movies.

The movie they saw was The Big Sleep. The plot didn’t even begin to make sense to Sylvan, but then there was Lauren Bacall, a girl almost her own age who had made herself up out of her own imagination, or so it seemed, falling in love with Bogart, a man who was totally and completely authentically what he was. She felt in her heart he wasn’t even acting; he was just that man who talked like that and smoked cigarettes and who was obviously old enough to be Bacall’s father. She knew right away that she was Bacall, and suddenly her black silk dress from Grossman’s felt drab and itchy on her skin, as though it didn’t fit her right, didn’t belong to her. And it was clear as a bell that Boaty wasn’t Bogart.

Sylvan took in every line of every dress Bacall wore, the drape of a suit, the flow of a gown, the sparkle of a brooch, the actual words the characters spoke flowing past her as though in a language she’d never heard before, all money and music. She imagined her own hair falling like that, in soft, gleaming waves around her face. She didn’t watch the movie so much as she watched the way Lauren Bacall moved her beautiful mouth, and heard the way she breathed sex and glamour into her every word. She imagined Lauren Bacall’s body moving beneath those clothes, and she could see in Bogart’s eyes that he was thinking the same thing.

The next day, Boaty gone, she stood in front of the mirror and lowered her chin and raised her eyes and looked at her reflection the way Bacall had looked at Bogart, trying to make with her mouth the sounds and syllables she had heard coming from Bacall. She practiced for hours, until she finally realized that she wasn’t Bacall, she didn’t have her body, and her neck got tired from keeping her chin on her chest all the time the way she did. She was somebody, but she wasn’t Bacall.

That night at supper, Sylvan said to Boaty, “Harrison? Will we go on a honeymoon?”

The question took him aback. He figured he’d already spent enough on her.

“It hadn’t occurred to me, baby.”

She got up from the table, sat on his lap and wrapped her arms around his neck, “Well, Harrison, honey, I’d like to. People do. Even my daddy and mama, they did. And I want to.”

He didn’t say anything. She kissed him on the neck, and he smelled the perfume he’d bought her at Grossman’s, Eau de Nile, by Elizabeth Arden. “I think it’d be nice.” She kissed him again, and he felt her tongue dart onto his neck, leaving a small wet spot he tried not to wipe with his hand, but he did, anyway.

“And where would you want to go? I’m not saying . . . where? Niagra Falls? I hear that’s popular.”

“I want to go to Hollywood, California.”

He laughed. “You say what? All that way? What in hell for?”

“I want to see where they live. Those movie stars. I want to eat in the restaurants they eat in. The Brown Derby. I want to go to Warner Brothers studio, if they’ll let us, and see where they make those movies. Is it far?”

“It’s all the way across the damned country. The whole country. Takes five days on a train.”

“I’ve never been on a train. I want to go on a train to Hollywood and see a movie star, face to face. Please, Daddy.”

He seemed confused.

“Will we sleep on the train?” she asked.

“Yes, if . . . yes, we would get a compartment and sleep on the train. And eat on the train and brush our teeth on the damned train.”

“All by ourselves?”

“Well, of course, by ourselves.”

“I’d be so nice to you, sweetie. I’d be just as sweet as pie.”

Boaty wasn’t quite sure what she meant by that, but his mind started working, and there were some things, some things he’d heard about, some things he’d heard girls could do, and while he wasn’t sure he wanted to do them, he knew he was supposed to want to do them, and if Hollywood was what it was going to take to find out, then he figured he might as well give it a shot. It began to seem like it wasn’t such a bad idea.

So, of course they went, five days there and five days back, in a Pullman car, and a week in a fancy hotel on Hollywood Boulevard, the Roosevelt, cost a fortune. He never talked about it, but whatever he found out about what women could do didn’t seem to make him any less cranky or mean.

That was pretty much it, for Boaty. He’d seen the world, he thought, although the limits of the world for him outside of Brownsburg were forever confined to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and Hollywood, California, and that was just fine with him. When Boaty came home from that last place, a place so vile and filled with bad food and rude people and high prices for even the smallest things and too much skin on everybody and too many teeth in every mouth, he’d pretty much had it.

But Sylvan, that’s a different story. Sylvan Glass was just getting started. That’s why she needed Claudie Wiley.





