CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

NED WORRIED. HE was a fretful boy.

He had come all this way to help Charlie, because Charlie had said he needed help, but there was nothing to do for him. Charlie wouldn’t get a lawyer, he wouldn’t confess or deny, he just held himself, his body and his talking, in a steel blue stillness that could not be broken. Ned smoked the first quarter of eighty cigarettes a day. He emptied ashtrays and swept butts off the porch from the time he got up to the time he went to bed. Lucky Strikes. They cost fifteen cents a pack. He washed Charlie’s clothes, left wherever they fell when he took them off. Made him change them when they were dirty. He cooked for him, because Charlie didn’t want to burden Will and Alma with his presence any more than he had to.

Everything irritated Charlie. There was not one thing that didn’t irritate him. The way hot foods burned his tongue and cold drinks made his teeth hurt. The way his clothes fit, the way the cotton lay against his back, the denim on his legs. The way his pillow held his head at night, not sleeping, tossing, until he finally got up and put on his miserable clothes and went out to the river, to his last piece of property, in the dead of night to stare at the voluptuous moon and wait for the first bird song, irritated, enraged.

But nothing irritated him as much as Jackie Robinson, who brought stinging tears of love to Charlie’s eyes, followed by an immediate urge for cruelty. He hated the way the dog looked at him with such pathetic faith, gave himself wholly to Charlie, even in Charlie’s neglect of him. There’s something about helplessness that makes us despise the helpless. There’s something about despair that makes us unable to abide affection. When Charlie paced from room to room, the dog followed him everywhere, nose at his heel, sometimes touching, the hard clack of Charlie’s heels on the wood floor, the soft pad of Jackie Robinson. Irritating, relentless.

Sometimes, he would hold the dog in his arms, softly, gently, and lay his head on Jackie’s back, just resting there, knowing that the dog would cradle him. And, almost immediately, he would want nothing more than to be rid of him, just because Jackie squirmed, because Jackie wanted to lick his face, to take his wrist gently in his mouth, to love him, for god’s sake, and that could not be allowed to happen. He thought that dog would make him crazy.

Jackie Robinson, frightened now, confused by signals he did not grasp, misbehaved, barked, raised his leg in the house, until Charlie got up, grabbed him, and smacked him on the head, something he’d never done before, something he regretted immediately, and saw at that moment that it had gone too far, that whatever had gone wrong between him and the dog was irreversible and would get worse. He grabbed a length of rope, and tied it to Jackie’s neck, and led him down the street and forced Alma and Will to take him. He said, “I can’t do this. I can’t have him any more,” and they knew he was telling the truth, and took him in, in the night, not knowing how they were going to keep him, with them gone all day. They could see from Charlie’s face that it had become an impossibility.

They took the dog’s rope from his hand, and stood with Jackie and watched Charlie walk sadly back up the street and get in his truck to go out to the river and spend the night alone in the chilling air on the hard ground.

He woke up the next morning and everything hurt, stiff, chilled and sweating, as though he had been drunk all night. He saw the river, grasped its beauty, and thought that he could wade in and bathe, but he didn’t. It was too far. Everything was too much trouble.

“Have some coffee,” Ned said as Charlie walked into the house. “Shave. Change your clothes. One foot in front of the other, that’s all.”

“Fuck you,” said Charlie. “Fuck you, fuck you, fuck you.” And the brother just took it, stood there holding out a hot cup of coffee, staring at him the way the dog had, and Charlie felt a wave of love and regret for this brother he didn’t know, a blush of shame at his own behavior.

“Get me a lawyer,” Charlie said, “Could you figure that out for me?”

“Already have,” Ned said. “Just say the word, it’s all set.”

It was closing in around him, all of it, but he changed his shirt the way Ned asked and went off to work, cutting steaks and roasts and chops all day for women who wouldn’t look at him, except for Claudie Wiley, who looked him in the eye and said, as though she knew what the answer might be, “How you doing, Mister Beale.” And “Just fine, Miss Wiley” was all he could think of to say, although he knew that she knew that he was lying and would have said more, would have told her everything, knowing that she knew most of it anyway, but there were limits and laws and “just fine” would have to do for all that there was unspoken and felt between them.

She would tell that woman she had seen him, that woman who never came in the store anymore, or the husband either. They had retreated into wherever couples go when they don’t want the world to see the bruise of their marriage, and they sent Claudie Wiley into the store to get their meat for them, and she would tell the woman that he was fine and that he had on a clean shirt but that he had not shaved his face, and that would be enough of a message. Everything that was going to be done was almost done, and no message from him through her would change any of that. Claudie had seen it all, made drawings in the night she showed Evelyn Hope and nobody else. The drawings frightened her, but a lot of things frightened Evelyn Hope.

Charlie Beale drove out to the slaughterhouse every Wednesday afternoon, as he always did, most often taking the boy, driving past her house without looking or stopping, wanting to say to Sam, don’t ever let this happen to you. Every week, Sam would look out the window and wave, shouting, “Look, Beebo. There’s Mrs. Glass. Look, Beebo.” But Charlie never turned his head to see her there, perfectly dressed, made up, staring down the hill into the road from her wide porch.

Instead, they talked about the World Series just past. The Yankees had won, breaking Sam’s heart, because if the Dodgers lost that meant Jackie Robinson lost personally, although, even if he was listening on the radio, the prospect of the first baseball game played under lights thrilled him and Charlie, both; they could picture the grass lit up to an incandescent green, the white men and Jackie, a black man, now moving in stride with other black men, Newcombe, Campanella, all the men as though in slow motion, shielding their eyes from the unfamiliar glare, the brightness of baseball made brighter by its stark silhouette against the Brooklyn evening. The Fireman, Joe Page, had been named MVP, and Jackie Robinson had gone home to his wife. They had all just gone home, the way they did every October, winners or losers. Sam took this personally.

Charlie and Ned drove over to Lexington after one of those afternoons. Ned had to drive because Charlie was shaking so bad, smoking, drinking a beer in the truck, his shirt still blotched with the blood of animals. They went to see Charlie’s new lawyer, Cully Blake, lean and preened and red-faced, already drunk, having been drunk since ten in the morning, as he always was. Cully Blake was white, clean-shaven, with buffed nails, immaculately starched shirts and drunk to the gills from ten a.m. on every day, which did not put him in an unusual position among Southern men of his time and station, and which didn’t interfere in any way with the performance of his job, which would have been slack under any conditions. Cully was a lazy, well-bred man of intelligence but no consequence, looking at two oddly matched brothers sitting in his office at day’s end and already wondering if his bill would be paid.

Anticipating that, Charlie pulled five hundred dollars in cash from his pocket and laid it on the table. “Think that’ll be enough, Mr. Blake?” he asked, and Cully knew it would, without even counting it. He’d seen piles of money before.

“Tell me what happened, Charlie. You don’t mind if I call you Charlie?”

“I do. That’s my money on the table, Mr. Blake.”

“Mr. Beale. Then. Sir. Tell me what happened.”

“I didn’t do it.”

“What did you do? Usually in this kind of case, a man has done something, even if he hasn’t done what the woman says he’s done.”

“I didn’t do anything. And I’m not going to talk about it.”

“Mrs. Glass says . . .”

“Don’t ever mention her name to me again.”

“That’s going to be a little difficult.”

“Hard or easy, that’s the way it is.”

“She’ll say things in court. Things you don’t want to have said in public.”

“Whatever she says, that’s what happened.”

“You look guilty, Mister Beale.” Blake said, thinking now only of his next drink of whiskey. “You have the look of a guilty man.”

“That could be. Every man has done something. I‘ve done things. Plenty of things. I just didn’t do this. I didn’t do this thing. Good evening, Mister Blake. Let me know when to be in court.”

They drove home in the autumn dark without talking. Charlie, drinking another beer, thought, How can you give so much of yourself without love? How can you do that thing with your body, your lips and breasts and tongue, and not feel some trace of love in your heart? Confused, troubled, and not less confused as he drank beer after beer, he who rarely touched alcohol, now on his way to being solidly drunk for the first time in a long time.

They sat up late, drinking in the near dark of Charlie’s kitchen, Ned talking softly from time to time. Charlie crying, sometimes just tears running down his face in horrible, flowing silence, sometimes huge, heaving sobs.

And all he said, with the vehement enunciation of the totally drunk, before he lurched up to bed, was, “I dint do anything. Did. Dent.”





